CIP-0152? | Modules in UPLC (#946)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: CIP-plutus-modules/README.md

for use as a reference script. This limits script code size, which in
turn limits the use of libraries in scripts, and ultimately limits the
sophistication of Cardano apps, compared to competing blockchains. The
script size limit is an aspect of Cardano that script developers
commonly complain about.

This CIP addresses this problem directly, by allowing reference inputs
to supply 'modules', which can be used from other scripts (including
other modules), thus allowing the code of a script to be spread across
many reference inputs. The 'main specification' requires *no* changes to
UPLC, PTLC, PIR or Plinth; only a 'dependency resolution' step before
scripts are run. Many variations are described for better performance,
including some requiring changes to the CEK machine itself.

Higher performance variations will be more expensive to implement; the
final choice of variations should take implementation cost into
account, and (in some cases) may require extensive benchmarking.

## Motivation: why is this CIP necessary?

Cardano scripts are currently subject to a fairly tight size limit;
even when they are supplied as a reference input, that UTxO must be

> created by a single transaction, which is subject to the overall

Author: I reworded this a little.

transaction size limit. Competing blockchains suffer from no such
limit: on the Ethereum chain, for example, contracts can call one
another, and so the code executed in one transaction may come from
many different contracts, created independently on the
blockchain--each subject to a contract size limit, but together
potentially many times that size. This enables more sophisticated
contracts to be implemented; conversely, on Cardano, it is rather
impractical to implement higher-level abstractions as libraries,
because doing so will likely exceed the script size limit. This is not

> just a theoretical problem: complaints about the script size limit are

Author: In the Abstract! Everything in the Abstract is repeated later... just in this case, 25 lines later. Surely that's OK?

commonly made by Cardano contract developers.

Thus the primary goal of this CIP is to lift the limit on the total
amount of code run during a script execution, by allowing part of the
code to be provided in external modules. By storing these modules on
the blockchain and providing them as reference UTxOs, it will be
possible to keep transactions small even though they may invoke a large
volume of code.

Once scripts can be split into separate modules, then the question
immediately arises of whether or not the script and the modules it
imports need to be in the same language. Today there are many
languages that compile to UPLC, and run on the Cardano
blockchain. Ideally it should be possible to define a useful library
in any of these languages, and then use it from all of them. A
secondary goal is thus to define a module system which permits this,

> by supporting cross-language calls.

Author: We took a look at WASM components, which address this issue for WASM... and includes an IDL to enable different languages to talk to each other. I think that will eventually be needed for Cardano too, but there's a lot to consider in that design, and it shouldn't hold up the basic mechanism for modules. So I think it is out of scope for this CIP.

> by supporting cross-language calls.

Reviewer: Yeah, you would definitely need an IDL of some kind.

> Note that many languages targetting UPLC already support modules. In

Author: Maybe... 

The point really is that we don't need to consider the software engineering purposes of modules, just focus on the low-level mechanism.

data Script =
  ScriptWithArgs { head :: CompleteScript, args :: [Arg] }

-- hash of a Script, not a CompleteScript
type ScriptHash = ByteString
```

Scripts in transactions, and on the chain, are represented in this
way, with dependencies that must be supplied in a transaction using
the script. During phase 2 verification we need to resolve the
arguments of each script before running it:
```
resolveScriptDependencies
  :: Map ScriptHash Script
  -> Script
  -> Maybe CompleteScript
resolveScriptDependencies preimages = go
  where
    go (ScriptWithArgs head args) = do
      argScripts <- traverse lookupArg args
      pure $ applyScript head argScripts
      where
        lookupArg :: Arg -> Maybe CompleteScript
        lookupArg (ScriptArg hash) = do
          script <- lookup hash preimages
          go script
```
The `preimages` map is the usual witness map constructed by the ledger,
so in order for a script hash argument to be resolved, the transaction
must provide the pre-image in the usual way. Note that arguments are
mapped to a `Script`, not a `CompleteScript`, so the result of looking
up a hash may contain further dependencies, which need to be resolved

> recursively. A transaction must provide witnesses for *all* the

Reviewer 2: > For a script to depend on itself, it must contain a reference to its own hash, which you can't get before creating the full script. So you essentially need to find a fixed-point of a complicated function involving a hash function, which I think we generally assume is hard.

I initially thought that that would be exactly as hard as finding a preimage of a given hash, which is generally assumed to be intractable.  Thinking about it a bit more, it's not obvious that it _is_ that hard.  I'll look into this a bit more.

> recursively. A transaction must provide witnesses for *all* the

Reviewer 2: In fact it's easy to create a bytestring that contains its own hash: just concantenate all of the possible hashes (admittedly you'd end up with a very big bytestring).  I'd assume that producing a Plutus Core term that contains a bytestring which is the hash of the term's serialised form is of a similar level of difficulty to producing a hash collision, but I don't know how you'd go about proving that.

recursive dependencies of the scripts it invokes.

The only scripts that can be run are complete scripts, so the type of
`runScript` changes to take a `CompleteScript` instead of a `Script`.

#### Variation: Lazy Loading

With this design, if any script hash is missing from the `preimages`,
then the entire resolution fails. As an alternative, we might replace

> missing subterms by a dummy value, such as `builtin unit`, thus:

Reviewer: You can't use `error` because UPLC is strict, so module values will tend to get evaluated eagerly, triggering the error. We could use `error` if module values were all delayed, for example. The nice thing about `()` is that either it doesn't work (which is fine), or it works... but in that case it just means you've accidentally supplied the right value!

> missing subterms by a dummy value, such as `builtin unit`, thus:

Reviewer 2: > You can't use `error` because UPLC is strict

Doh.  In my defence, it was late at night.  I think there is still an issue (mentioned later) that all terms of type `()` aren't equaivalent because of `error`.  It's hard to imagine that that would arise in reality though.

```
  case t of (constr 0 x1...xi...xn) -> xi
```
which takes time linear in the size of the tuple to execute, because
all `n` components need to be extracted from the tuple and passed to
the case branch (represented by a function).

We assume below that there is an expression `proj i t` in UPLC, where
`i` is a constant, which efficiently extracts the `i`th component from
tuple `t`. There are several ways this could be implemented:

* `proj i t` could be added as a new construct to UPLC, together with
  extensions to the CEK machine to evaluate it.
* `proj` could be added as a new built-in to UPLC--probably a smaller
  change to the implementation, but less efficient (because `i` would
  be an argument needing evaluation, rather than a constant integer in
  the AST), and problematic to add to TPLC (because typing it requires
  dependent types).
* represent 'tuples' in this context as functions from indices to
  components, so `(x,y,z)` would be represented as
  ```
  λi. case i of 0 -> x
      	     	1 -> y
		2 -> z
  ```
  This requires support in UPLC for pattern-matching on integers in
  constant time, which is not implemented right now, but is on the

>   horizon. It would also need dependent types to be typed, and so

Reviewer 3: @kwxm see https://github.com/IntersectMBO/plutus/issues/6602

so any change in a dependency will lead to a change in the script
hash.

### Lazy loading

The 'lazy loading' variation in the specification section above
permits fewer modules to be supplied in a transaction.  Dependency
trees have a tendency to grow very large; when one function in a
module uses another module, it becomes a dependency of the entire
module and not just of that function. It is easy to imagine situations
in which a script depends on many modules, but a particular call
requires only a few of them. For example, if a script offers a choice
of protocols for redemption, only one of which is used in a particular
call, then many modules may not actually be needed. The variation
allows a transaction to omit the unused modules in such cases. This
reduces the size of the transaction, which need provide fewer
witnesses, but more importantly it reduces the amount of code which
must be loaded from reference UTxOs.

If a script execution *does* try to use a module which was not
provided, it will encounter a run-time type error and fail (unless the
module value was `builtin unit`, in which case the script will behave

> as though the module had been provided).

Reviewer 2: Is this true?  If modules are allowed to be arbitrary terms then you could supply `let _ = error in ()` and the script would fail, but if that's replaced with `()` then the script might suceed.

I'm not sure that the script would necessarily produce a run-time type error if it tries to use a supposedly unused module which has been replaced by `builtin unit`.  Surely the script could use that module to perform some computation but discard the result of the computation without ever using it.  Maybe that's OK as long as everything is pure, but the presence of the side-effecting `error` in UPLC complicates things.

To take advantage of this variation, it is necessary, when a
transaction is constructed, to *observe* which script arguments are
actually used by the script invocations needed to validate the
transaction. The transaction balancer runs the scripts anyway, and so
can in principle observe the uses of script arguments, and include
witnesses in the transaction for just those arguments that are used.

#### Balancer modifications

To take advantage of 'lazy loading', it's necessary to identify
reference scripts that are *dynamically* unused, when the scripts in a
transaction run. The best place to do that is in a transaction

> balancer, which needs to run the scripts anyway, both to check that

Reviewer 2: I haven't come across the term "transaction balancer" before, and Google isn't being very helpful.  To be clear,  this is  something that is run **off the chain** prior to transaction submission, no?  If that's the case, I'm not sure if it's necessary to go into this level of detail in the CIP.  Since on-chain scripts are deterministic it seems pretty clear that you can run them in some kind of instrumented evaluator to determine which parts of the AST are actually required.

Reviewer 3: It is basically the code for building transactions, e.g., in cardano-api there is `Cardano.Api.Fees.makeTransactionBodyAutoBalance`. Yes it runs off-chain.

Author: Yes, indeed, it's an off-chain step that is part of preparing a transaction for submission. Should transaction balancing be addressed in the CIP? I'd agree that it's not *necessary* to do so, in that it doesn't affect the chain itself, but I've included this discussion in an effort to be helpful--after all, *somebody* is going to have to implement script dropping if lazy loading is to be valuable, and--as I think the discussion shows--it's not totally straightforward to do that. So no harm in describing some options.

Reviewer 4: The term that people mostly use for this is coin selection. Though technically this just refers to picking UTxO entries, I don't know if people also use it to mean transaction balancing more generally.

cost. Each script is converted into a value only once, no matter how
many times it is referred to, saving time and memory when modules
appear several times in a module hierarchy.

On the other hand it does restrict the syntactic form of
scripts. Scripts are restricted to be syntactic lambda expressions,
binding their script arguments at the top-level. This is not so
onerous. But inside those λs, there must also be a syntactic
value. For example, consider a module represented by a tuple, whose
components represent the exports of the module. Then all of those exports
need to be syntactic values--an exported value could not be computed
at run-time, for example using an API exported by another
module. While many module exports are functions, and so naturally
written as λ-expressions (which are values), this restriction will be
onerous at times.

This method does require opening up the API of the CEK machine, so
that CEK values can be constructed in other modules, and introducing a
way to run the machine starting from a given configuration. So it
requires more invasive changes to the code than the main
specification.

#### `ScriptHash` allowed in terms?

> An alternative design would allow UPLC terms to contain `ScriptHash`es

Reviewer 2: We looked into something a bit like this in connection with Merklising PLC ASTs.  It was a non-starter because hashes are quite large (maybe 32 bytes) and theyr'e incompressible, so once you've got a few hashes in your script you've used up quite a lot of the size allowance.

Author: Ah... interesting. That strengthens the arguments against it. I will add a note to that effect.

occurrences of `Y h` are represented by the same pointer. But when the
reductions are applied by a compiler, and the resulting term is
serialized to UPLC code for inclusion in a script, then each
occurrence of `Y h` will be serialized separately, losing sharing and
causing code duplication in the resulting script. The result could be
*larger* code, the opposite of what we are trying to achieve. Thus
this method of compiling recursion fits badly with the 'value scripts'
variation.

Hence module-level recursion, which allows recursive occurrences of
script values to be referred to via the `Self` variable instead of
using a fixpoint combinator implemented in UPLC. To take advantage of
this feature, the compiler will need to float occurrences of `fix`
upwards, to the top-level of a module. This can be done using suitable
analogues of the rules
```
(..,fix (λx.e),...) ---> fix (λx.(..,e[proj i x/x],..))
```
where `i` is the index in the tuple at which `fix (λx.e)` appears,
`proj i x` selects the `i`th component from `x`, and `x` does not
occur free elsewhere in the tuple; a corresponding rule for
constructor applications; and
```
fix (λx. fix (λy.e)) ---> fix (λx. e[x/y])
```

> Both these rules require adjusting deBruin numbers in the UPLC

Reviewer 2: "de Bruijn"

Author: Thank you!

except for the addition of an API for building and using modules in
Plinth. In the case of the 'modified CEK machine' alternative for
'balancer modifications', without 'value scripts', it requires *adding
a construct* to UPLC to tag values so that their use can be observed;
this is a *minor* change which is backwards-compatible, but it would
require a new PlutusCore language version.

Building the module environment in to the CEK machine requires *adding
a construct* to UPLC to refer to components of the module environment;
this is a *minor* change which is backwards-compatible, but it would
also require a new PlutusCore language version.

Because this CIP changes the representation of scripts, it requires a
new Plutus Core ledger language, and can only be introduced at a hard
fork.

As far as the Ledger is concerned, the representation of a script is
just `bytes`. This does not change. Therefore there are no changes to
the Ledger, and thus this is not a Ledger CIP,

## Acknowledgements

This CIP draws heavily on a design by Michael Peyton Jones, and has
benefitted greatly from discussion with Ziyang Liu, Roman Kireev, and
Phil Wadler.

## Copyright

> This CIP is licensed under [CC-BY-4.0]](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode).

Reviewer 2: I think there's an extra `]` here: it's not rendering as a proper link.

	   (deserialize (getPlc head))

```
That is, a script is turned into a value by creating a CEK machine
environment from the values of the `ScriptArg`s, and converting the
body of the script (a syntactic value) in a CekValue in that
environment.

This pseudocode follows the 'lazy loading' variation; an easy
variation treats not finding a script hash as an error.

Syntactic values are turned into `CekValue`s by the following
function, which is derived by simplifying `computeCek` in
UntypedPlutusCore.Evaluation.Machine.Cek.Internal, and restricting it
to syntactic values.
```
cekValue
  :: Env
  -> NTerm
  -> CEKValue
cekValue env t = case t of
  Var _ varname      -> lookupVarName varName env
  Constant _ val     -> VCon val
  LamAbs _ name body -> VLamAbs name body env
  Delay _ body       -> VDelay body env
  Builtin _ bn       ->
    let meaning = lookupBuiltin bn ?cekRuntime in
    VBuiltin bn (Builtin () bn) meaning
  Constr _ i es      ->
    VConstr i (foldr ConsStack EmptyStack (map (cekValue env) es)
  _                  -> error
```
Converting a syntactic value to a CekValue does require traversing it,
but the traversal stops at λs and delays, so will normally traverse

> only the top levels of a term.

Author: Interesting... so deserialize directly to a CekValue. Well, why not? That would mean deserialization would need to take the constructed *environment* (mapping deBruijn variables to module values) as an argument. But circular programs are our friend!

> only the top levels of a term.

Reviewer: Yep. It would be tricky, but in principle I think we shouldn't need more than one pass over the program.

Finally, if `preimages` is the `Map ScriptHash Script` constructed from
a transaction, then we may define
```
scriptValues = Map.map (scriptCekValue scriptValues) preimages
```
to compute the CekValue of each script.

Scripts are then applied to their arguments by building an initial CEK
machine configuration applying the script value to its argument value.

> Note that this recursive definition of `scriptValues` could potentially allow an

Author: Yes--why take the risk? "Probably impossible", even with the resources of a nation state, but on the other hand, not too hard to defend against.

```
h = hash (Script head (h:args))
```
We assume that finding such an `h` is impossible in practice; should
this not be the case, or if we should wish to defend against an
attacker with the resources to find such an attack on the hash
function, then we must build a script dependency graph for each
transaction and check that it is acyclic before evaluating the scripts
in this way.

##### Cost

Converting `Script`s to `CekValue`s does require a traversal of all
`Script`s, and the top level of each `Script` value. This is linear
time in the total size of the scripts, though, and should be
considerably faster than doing the same evaluation using CEK machine
transitions. The conversion can be done *once* for a whole
transaction, sharing the cost between several scripts if they share
modules (such as frequently used libraries). So costs should be
charged *for the whole transaction*, not per script. The most accurate
cost would be proportional to the total size of values at the
top-level of scripts. A simpler approach would be to charge a cost
proportional to the aggregated size of all scripts, including
reference scripts--although this risks penalizing complex scripts with

> a simple API.

Author: What I meant here is not that we might treat reference scripts differently from other scripts, but rather that we might charge (all scripts) in proportion to the *top-level size*, which we can of course determine. Taking the total size of scripts is an overestimate, in many cases a large one. On the other hand, I suspect the difference in fees for *this* step is down in the noise.

##### Implementation concerns
The CEK implementation does not, today, expose an API for starting
evaluation from a given configuration, or constructing `CekValue`s
directly, so this variation does involve significant changes to the
CEK machine itself.

##### Subvariation: Module-level recursion

> Many modules define recursive functions at the top-level. In this

Author: Yes--I'll add some more explicit text about this.

  ```
  This requires support in UPLC for pattern-matching on integers in
  constant time, which is not implemented right now, but is on the
  horizon. It would also need dependent types to be typed, and so
  cannot be added to Plinth, PIR or PTLC.

In the sections below we just use tuples and the notation `proj i t`,
on the assumption that an implementation is chosen and deployed.

#### Variation: Tuples of modules

In the main specification in this CIP, script code is a curried
function of the script arguments; that is, imported modules are
supplied to scripts as individual arguments. In this variation, the
script code is instead an *uncurried* function of the script
arguments, which are tupled together to be passed to the script code.

This variation only makes sense if the 'value scripts' variation is
also adopted, and places an additional syntactic restriction on script
code: it must be of the form `λMods.e`, and all occurrences of `Mods`
in `e` must be of the form `proj i Mods` for some `i`. That is, it is
impossible to refer to the whole tuple of modules; scripts can refer
to only one module at a time.

To avoid additional overheads for scripts without arguments, we

> redefine the `Script` type as follows:

Author: Done.

take code from elsewhere and turn it into a `Module t` for arbitrary
choice of `t`; this can be used to import modules compiled from other
languages into Plinth (provided a sensible Plinth type can be given to
them).

### Static vs Dynamic Linking

With the introduction of modules, scripts are no longer
self-contained--they may depend on imported modules. This applies both
to scripts for direct use, such as spending verifiers, and to scripts
representing modules stored on the chain.  A module may depend on
imported modules, and so on transitively. An important question is
when the identity of those modules is decided. In particular, if a
module is replaced by a new version, perhaps fixing a bug, can
*existing* code on the chain use the new version instead of the old?

The design in this CIP supports both alternatives. Suppose a module
`A` imports modules `B` and `C`. Then module `A` will be represented
as the lambda-expression `λB.λC.A`. This can be compiled into a
`CompleteScript` and placed on the chain, with en empty list of
`ScriptArg`s, as a reference script in a UTxO, allowing it to be used
with any implementations of `B` and `C`--the calling script must pass

> implementations of `B` and `C` to the lambda expression, and can

Author: I think it is different. When you submit a transaction, you have to fix versions of B and C, of course. So you need a script *in your transaction* which takes A, B and C as script arguments, and passes B and C to A. The point is, you can put A on the chain *once*, and use it with different implementations of B and C. That's not static linking, is it?

...` in variations other than 'value scripts').

The CEK machine is parameterized over an emitter function, used for
logging. We can make use of this to emit `ScriptHash`es as they are
used. This allows the balancer to observe which `ScriptHash`es *were*
used.

Simply evaluating a tagged value, or building it into a
data-structure, does not *use* it in the sense we mean here: replacing
such a value with `builtin unit` will not cause a validation
failure. Only when such a value is actually *used* should we strip the
tag, emit the `ScriptHash` in the `CekM` monad, and continue with the
untagged value. This should be done in `returnCek`, on encountering a
`FrameCases` context for a tagged value, and in `applyEvaluate` when
the function to be applied turns out to be tagged, or when the
argument to a `builtin` turns out to be tagged.

Adding and removing tags must be assigned a zero cost *in the
balancer*, since the intention is that they should not appear in
transactions when they are verified on the chain. Thus a zero cost is
required for the balancer to return accurate costs for script
verification on the chain. On the other hand, if these operations *do*

> reach the chain, then they should have a *high* cost, to deter attacks

Reviewer: they should just not be part of the specified syntax of UPLC and be invalid on chain, easy

Author: > > If modules are allowed to be arbitrary terms then you could supply let _ = error in () and the script would fail, but if that's replaced with () then the script might suceed.

> This is a good point! I hadn't though that this might convert failures to successes but indeed it can. This doesn't occur with the value scripts proposal, which is maybe a point in its favour.

No. In this case the *original* attempt to verify the transaction, with *all* modules present, will fail. The point of lazy loading is only to preserve success--there's no need even to try dropping reference inputs from transactions which already fail.

> > I'm not sure that the script would necessarily produce a run-time type error if it tries to use a supposedly unused module which has been replaced by builtin unit.

> Well, I think the claim is that either it produces the same result as it would have if we hadn't replaced it or it gives an error. And I think that's pretty convincing? All you can do with a unit value is:

> Do things which don't depend on what it is at all (semantics are the same)
> Do things that rely on it being unit (semantics are the same!)
> Do things that rely on it being non-unit (should fail when given unit)

In *untyped* code, you can check whether you have unit (I assume), and do something else if you do. This would enable untyped scripts to detect that a module was missing, and handle that error somehow. Not sure if that's useful, but it seems legitimate at least. UPLC compiled from typed code will not be able to do this, of course.

Author: > they should just not be part of the specified syntax of UPLC and be invalid on chain, easy

You mean, include them in the type, but don't deserialize them? Seems a little brittle: a future developer might notice the missing case in the deserializer, and add it, not realising that its absence was *essential* to defend against an attack. Or am I just jaded?

Reviewer: > No. In this case the original attempt to verify the transaction, with all modules present, will fail. The point of lazy loading is only to preserve success--there's no need even to try dropping reference inputs from transactions which already fail.

You're not thinking about attackers. If the version with the modules present fails but the version with some moduels present doesn't, then that's potentially an _attack_. We really do not want to let the person running the script make it succeed when it would have failed! 

> You mean, include them in the type, but don't deserialize them? Seems a little brittle: a future developer might notice the missing case in the deserializer, and add it, not realising that its absence was essential to defend against an attack.

We have a specification for a reason :)

Author: > > No. In this case the original attempt to verify the transaction, with all modules present, will fail. The point of lazy loading is only to preserve success--there's no need even to try dropping reference inputs from transactions which already fail.
> 
> You're not thinking about attackers. If the version with the modules present fails but the version with some moduels present doesn't, then that's potentially an _attack_. We really do not want to let the person running the script make it succeed when it would have failed!

Hmm. We're considering a case in which a module fails when evaluated, causing any script which imports it to fail. Note that this can't happen with value scripts. But in that case the vulnerability would kick in if somebody put a script on the chain that DOES import the module in question, and so can never succeed, and then an attacker USED that script, but left out the offending module. Suppose the script is a spending verifier on a UTxO. Then the vulnerable situation is where someone creates a UTxO with a spending verifier that can never succeed, and does so in this slightly obscure manner, but an attacker can spend the UTxO anyway. OK, it's a vulnerability. You really have to work to fall victim to it though! And it is interesting that the value scripts idea fixes it...

Reviewer: You have to work to fall victim to it... if you use this feature in the way you are envisaging. Which people won't. IME it's just better not to have such semantic loopholes at all, if we can possibly avoid it.

Author: Well, that's an argument in favour of the value scripts variation.

function it is passed to might not actually use it in all cases. Hence
the set of scripts used would be overestimated.

One might use a more sophisticated strategy to insert `Force`
operations. For example, in the case described above one might pass
the script argument *unforced* to the function, and modify the
function to force it when it is used. This would require the balancer
to perform a flow analysis, to identify the functions that might be
passed a delayed script argument. Moreover, such functions might be
called *sometimes* with a delayed script argument, and sometimes
not. The code could be replicated to create two versions of such
functions. But with *n* script arguments, this might require up to
*2^n* versions of each function, leading to an exponential increase in
code size. An attacker could exploit this to craft a transaction that
would cause the balancer to run out of memory. This is really not
attractive.

Finally, one might finesse these problems by modifying the CEK machine
to force delayed closures automatically where the value is required,
thus enabling explicit `Force` operations to be omitted. This would

> effectively turn UPLC into a lazy programming language. That would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
effectively turn UPLC into a call-by-name programming language. That would

```

upwards, to the top-level of a module. This can be done using suitable
analogues of the rules
```
(..,fix (λx.e),...) ---> fix (λx.(..,e[proj i x/x],..))
```
where `i` is the index in the tuple at which `fix (λx.e)` appears,
`proj i x` selects the `i`th component from `x`, and `x` does not
occur free elsewhere in the tuple; a corresponding rule for
constructor applications; and
```
fix (λx. fix (λy.e)) ---> fix (λx. e[x/y])
```
Both these rules require adjusting deBruin numbers in the UPLC
implementation.

The intention here is to implement module-level recursion using a
cyclic data-structure--the value restriction guarantees that the
module value `Self` is not needed to compute the top-level value of
the module, and thus there is no risk of falling into an infinite loop
at this point. (Of course, a recursive function can loop *when it is
called*, but constructing the function itself cannot loop because it
must be a syntactic λ-expression). This is a *more efficient* way to
implement recursion than the fixpoint combinators currently used in
UPLC, and so will probably become the preferred way to implement
recursion.

#### Variation: Explicit lambdas

> This variation lifts some of the restrictions of the 'value scripts'

Reviewer: Is this a variation? I thought this was just the original design

Author: The original design didn't require syntactic lambdas at the top-level, to bind the script arguments. This variation does. At least, that was my understanding of the original design.

Reviewer: Ah I see. And the advantage is that we can rapidly pass the arguments via a pre-constructed environment?

Author: Yes, exactly.

---
CIP: "?"
Title: Modules in UPLC
Status: Proposed
Category: Plutus
Authors:
  - John Hughes <john.hughes@quviq.com>
Implementors: []
Discussions: []
Created: 2024-11-12
License: CC-BY-4.0
---
## Abstract

Cardano scripts are limited in complexity by the fact that each script
must be supplied in one transaction, whether the script is supplied in
the same transaction in which it is used, or pre-loaded onto the chain
for use as a reference script. This limits script code size, which in
turn limits the use of libraries in scripts, and ultimately limits the
sophistication of Cardano apps, compared to competing blockchains. It

> is the aspect of Cardano that script developers complain about most.

Author: Thanks--I took this from a meeting, but the claim seems to be exaggerated. I will weaken the language.

> is the aspect of Cardano that script developers complain about most.

Reviewer 5: I disagree here. Prior to the introduction of reference scripts, complaints about size were common, now with the withdraw-zero trick / other forwarding logic scripts, and reference scripts, script size is not really an issue, in-fact most dApps happily accept increased script size for reduced ex-units (more aggressive inlining / manual recursion unrolling / lookup tables). 

I do agree that regardless of whether or not script size restraints are still a pain point, modules are still valuable.

the blockchain and providing them as reference UTxOs, it will be
possible to keep transactions small even though they may invoke a large
volume of code.

Once scripts can be split into separate modules, then the question
immediately arises of whether or not the script and the modules it
imports need to be in the same language. Today there are many
languages that compile to UPLC, and run on the Cardano
blockchain. Ideally it should be possible to define a useful library
in any of these languages, and then use it from all of them. A
secondary goal is thus to define a module system which permits this,
by supporting cross-language calls.

Note that Plinth already enjoys a module system, namely the Haskell
module system. This already enables Plinth code to be distributed
across several modules, or put into libraries and shared. Indeed
this is already heavily used: the DJED code base distributes Plinth
code across 24 files, of which only 4 contain top-level contracts, and
the others provide supporting code of one sort or another. Thus the
software engineering benefits of a module system are already
available; other languages compiled to UPLC could provide a module

> system in a similar way. The *disadvantage* of this approach is that

Reviewer 3: Yeah, the choice of terminology can be a bit confusing and could be made more precise. The term "static/dynamic linking" is being used to refer to two different things:
- You are saying: static linking = status quo where each script is a monolith, (semi-)dynamic linking = what this CIP proposes
- whereas there's a subsection "Static vs Dynamic Linking" in the CIP, where static linking = a module specifies its dependency hashes, and dynamic linking = it doesn't specify them.

> system in a similar way. The *disadvantage* of this approach is that

Author: I will make it clear that many languages already support modules, not just Plutus/Haskell. But with the limitation that all the code ends up in one script, and so is subject to the script size limit.

transactions exploit multiple modules. We may conclude that there is a
significant demand for modules in the context of smart contracts, even
if the total contract code still remains relatively small.

## Specification

### Adding modules to UPLC

This CIP provides the simplest possible way to split scripts across
multiple UTxOs; essentially, it allows any closed subterm to be
replaced by its hash, whereupon the term can be supplied either as a
witness in the invoking transaction, or via a [reference script](https://cips.cardano.org/cip/CIP-0033) in that
transaction. To avoid any change to the syntax of UPLC, hashes are
allowed only at the top-level (so to replace a deeply nested subterm
by its hash, we need to first lambda-abstract it). This also places
all references to external terms in one place, where they can easily
be found and resolved. Thus we need only change the definition of a
`Script`; instead of simply some code, it becomes the application of
code to zero or more arguments, given by hashes.

Currently, the definition of “script” used by the ledger is (approximately):
```
newtype Script = Script ShortByteString

> ```

Reviewer 3: I don't think this CIP is proposing publishing CEk terms as scripts. As to distinguishing validators vs. modules, the `Script` data type defined in "Subvariation: Unboxed modules" allows for it.

> ```

Author: Right, the CEK values exist only during phase 2 validation; they are never stored on the chain. And as Ziyang says, the 'unboxed modules' subvariation does distinguish module scripts from validators, primarily because (in that variation) they are subject to different syntactic restrictions. So if the deserializer is going to check those, then it needs to know what kind of script it is deserializing.

We change this to:
```
newtype CompleteScript = CompleteScript ShortByteString

newtype Arg = ScriptArg ScriptHash

data Script =
  ScriptWithArgs { head :: CompleteScript, args :: [Arg] }

-- hash of a Script, not a CompleteScript
type ScriptHash = ByteString
```

We need to resolve the arguments of a script before running it:
```
resolveScriptDependencies
  :: Map ScriptHash Script
  -> Script
  -> Maybe CompleteScript
resolveScriptDependencies preimages = go
  where
    go (ScriptWithArgs head args) = do
      argScripts <- traverse lookupArg args
      pure $ applyScript head argScripts
      where
        lookupArg :: Arg -> Maybe CompleteScript
        lookupArg (ScriptArg hash) = do
          script <- lookup hash preimages
          go script

> ```

Reviewer 3: > are you suggesting that the ledger becomes aware of scripts dependencies? And if so, by which means shall transaction communicate this intent to the ledger?

Yes. a serialised script is deserialised into either a complete script with no dependency, or a script plus a list of dependencies, and in the latter case the ledger will need to retrieve those dependencies and link them together to form a complete script.

> ```

Author: Exactly. I clarified that this happens during phase 2 verification, and that scripts on the chain are represented in this form, with dependencies just in the form of hashes.

```
resolveScriptDependencies
  :: Map ScriptHash Script
  -> Script
  -> CompleteScript
resolveScriptDependencies preimages = go
  where
    go (ScriptWithArgs head args) =
      applyScript head (map lookupArg args)
      where
        lookupArg :: Arg -> CompleteScript
        lookupArg (ScriptArg hash) = do
          case lookup hash preimages of
	    Nothing     -> builtin unit
	    Just script -> go script
```
This would allow transactions to provide witnesses only for script
arguments which are actually *used* in the calls that the transaction
makes. This may sometimes lead to a significant reduction in the
amount of code that must be loaded; for example, imagine a spending
verifier which offers a choice of two encryption methods, provided as
separate script arguments. In any call of the verifier, only one
encryption method will be required, allowing the other (and all its
dependencies) to be omitted from the spending transaction.

#### Variation: Value Scripts

The goal of this variation is to eliminate the cost of evaluating
scripts, by converting them directly to values. Since UPLC runs on the
CEK machine, this means converting them directly into the `CekValue` type,

> *without* any CEK machine execution. To make this possible, the syntax

Author: Right, it's linear time in the size of the *top-level* of scripts--one traversal over the code which need not descend inside values at the top level of a module. So reasonable to cover it from the reference script fee.

Scripts are then applied to their arguments by building an initial CEK
machine configuration applying the script value to its argument value.

Note that this recursive definition of `scriptValues` could potentially allow an
attacker to cause a black-hole exception in the transaction validator,
by submitting a transaction containing scripts with a dependency
cycle. However, since scripts are referred to by hashes, then
constructing such a transaction would require an attack on the hash
function itself... for example a script hash `h` and values for `head`
and `args` such that
```
h = hash (Script head (h:args))
```
We assume that finding such an `h` is impossible in practice; should
this not be the case, then we must build a script dependency graph for
each transaction and check that it is acyclic before evaluating the
scripts in this way.

##### Cost

Converting `Script`s to `CekValue`s does require a traversal of all
`Script`s, and the top level of each `Script` value. This is linear
time in the total size of the scripts, though, and should be
considerably faster than doing the same evaluation using CEK machine
transitions. The conversion can be done *once* for a whole

> transaction, sharing the cost between several scripts if they share

Reviewer 3: Different redeemers may indeed result in different modules being required to present - but I don't think this poses any problem, does it?

Your second point I think is the same as the "Merkelized Validators" discussed in the related work.

> transaction, sharing the cost between several scripts if they share

Reviewer 5: @KtorZ 

The design patterns repo has a separate readme specifically for the withdraw zero trick, 

https://github.com/Anastasia-Labs/design-patterns/blob/main/stake-validator/STAKE-VALIDATOR-TRICK.md

> transaction, sharing the cost between several scripts if they share

Author: There was a section on "Merkelized validators" that discusses this; I have added links to the stake-validator trick directly to that section. I also made the discussion there a little more explicit: it's a great trick for sharing work between validators, which is useful with-or-without the modules discussed in this CIP--so it's not *replaced* by this CIP; but as a way of *implementing* modules it is intricate and unsatisfactory.

Re "cache hits", they will occur when *different* modules in the dependency tree depend in turn on the *same* module. So a module containing basic definitions for an application, and used in many parts of it, would fall into that category. So would a commonly-used library that many modules (in the same application) might depend on. I'm expecting to see quite a lot of this.

Where 'lazy loading' is concerned, note that it is the *particular transaction* that decides which dependencies to supply. Yes indeed, the dependencies needed will vary depending on the redeemer value. That's what we want to take advantage of--that in a particular transaction, we know what the redeemer value is, and so we can decide to omit modules that are not going to be needed. Dangling pointers ftw! (As long as they're not going to be used).

> transaction, sharing the cost between several scripts if they share

Reviewer 6: @colll78 Is the "Merkelized Validators" like "memoization on chain"?

> transaction, sharing the cost between several scripts if they share

Reviewer 5: @bezirg In some ways, yes it allows that, but primarily, the purpose is very similar to this script. It just allows you to define a function `f` in one script and call it in a different script. 

The reason the docs talk about memorization, is because this design pattern is because many of the popular use-cases of this design pattern allow the user the option to write the result of `f` to the chain, such that the next time a script uses merkelized validators to call `f` on a given value (that has already been executed before) the transaction does not need to actually evaluate `f` anymore. When you opt to memorize a given execution, the result of `f` on the given argument is stored with an NFT in a script. Subsequent calls of `f` on that specific argument `arg`, can simply provide the UTxO with that NFT as a reference input and read the result of `(f arg)` from the datum of that reference input, instead of redundantly executing `(f arg)` again since the value is already known as it has already been computed in a previous transaction.

the actual costs of evaluating all the previous ones.

To avoid circular dependencies, the scripts must be topologically
sorted before evaluation, so that no earlier script depends on a later
one. Topological sorting is linear time in the total number of scripts
and script arguments.

It is still possible to write a recursive definition of the
`scriptValues`, so that each script can depend on the *same* map, but
care is needed to avoid circular dependencies for the reasons
explained above.

#### A Note on Tuples

The following variations make heavy use of tuples which in practice
could grow quite large--tuples of modules, and modules as tuples of
exports. These variations only make sense if projection of a component
from a tuple is *efficient*, and in particular, constant time,
independent of the tuple size. At present, tuples are represented
using the SoP extension (CIP-85) as `constr 0 x1...xn`, but the only
way to select the `i`th component is using
```
  case t of (constr 0 x1...xi...xn) -> xi
```
which takes time linear in the size of the tuple to execute, because
all `n` components need to be extracted from the tuple and passed to

> the case branch (represented by a function).

Reviewer 3: Yes that would be logn `case` terms, cheaper in terms of execution units (at least for long tuples) but bigger in script size.

> the case branch (represented by a function).

Author: Logarithmic is better than linear, but it's also the cost of accessing variables in the environment (which is logarithmic in the size of the environment). So the advantage of putting the module exports into one tuple instead of bunging them all into the environment would disappear. Much better to bite the bullet and put in explicit projections, getting constant time access.

Plutus V1, V2 and V3 can therefore be understood as type signatures, in the sense that they each represent a subset of UPLC programs with specific types. Any UPLC program that matches the expected argument and return types can be considered and used as a Plutus V1, V2 or V3 script.
A new ledger era is the primary reason for introducing a new ledger language version, though technically there can be cases where a new ledger language version is necessary without a new ledger era.

Currently each script on-chain is tagged with a specific ledger language version - V1, V2, V3 or native script - and this version tag is a component of the script hash.
A logical approach, therefore, is to continue doing so for module scripts, and require that a validator script and all modules it references must use the same ledger language version; failure to do so leads to a phase-1 error.

A different approach is to distinguish between validator scripts and module scripts by applying version tags only to validator scripts.
Module scripts are untagged and can be linked to any validator script.

> This makes module scripts more reusable, which is advantageous because in most cases, a UPLC program has the same semantics regardless of the ledger language version.

Reviewer 3: Yes, this is the point I made in the next paragraph. I think we'll most likely go with the first approach, i.e., tagged modules.

> This makes module scripts more reusable, which is advantageous because in most cases, a UPLC program has the same semantics regardless of the ledger language version.

Reviewer 2: > Are the semantic changes of builtin functions all documented in the changelog or anywhere?

See Table 4.6 in  Section 4.3 (page 27) of the [Plutus Core specification](url).

introduces no new problems.

Note that there is now (since August 2024) a hard limit on the total
size of reference scripts used in a transaction, and the transaction
fee is exponential in the total script size (see
[here](https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-ledger/blob/master/docs/adr/2024-08-14_009-refscripts-fee-change.md)).The
exponential fees provide a strong motivation to prefer the 'lazy
loading' variation in this CIP: even a small reduction in the number
of reference scripts that need to be provided may lead to a large
reduction in transaction fees.

The motivation for these fees is to deter DDoS attacks based on
supplying very large Plutus scripts that are costly to deserialize,
but run fast and so incur low execution unit fees. While these fees
are likely to be reasonable for moderate use of the module system, in
the longer term they could become prohibitive for more complex
applications. It may be necessary to revisit this design decision in
the future. To be successful, the DDoS defence just needs fees to
become *sufficiently* expensive per byte as the total size of
reference scripts grows; they do not need to grow without bound. So

> there is scope for rethinking here.

Reviewer 7: > It may be necessary to revisit this design decision in the future.

I don't think this can be left for "future work". I really think it should be updated if necessary when this CIP gets implemented. The reason for this is I don't think DApps should be treated as standalone applications. I think the following example perfectly exemplifies why:

Right now, all stablecoins are not fungible despite them all effectively being the the US dollar. You can't repay a loan in DJED using USDM. If DApps were composable, you could compose a DEX with the lending/borrowing DApp to convert the USDM to DJED in the same transaction where you make the loan payment. DApp composability makes stablecoins fungible!

This isn't possible on account style blockchains because each DApp is individually too expensive. On Cardano, you can compose 10 different DApps in the same transaction. I think this module approach would be huge, but only if it doesn't interfere with DApp composability. AFAIU that means lazy loading is 100% a requirement and users should be able to compose 4-5 DApps in a single transaction even with this module approach. Otherwise, this CIP could end up seriously handicapping the potential of Cardano's DeFi. 

I was personally frustrated when I saw there was a hard-cap on the reference script size; if people want to pay up to fit more DApps into the transaction, let them! I'm fine with the cost being exponential after a certain point (ideally after 4-5 DApps in the transaction), but the hard limit doesn't make sense to me as long as the user pays for it. The adr linked to doesn't give any justification for the hard limit aside from "further increase the resilience". This CIP could easily exacerbate the issues with the reference script fee calculation.

Author: I agree it's going to be necessary. I just don't think it's a *prerequisite*... so modules should not be held up waiting for this. They'll be useful even without a change to reference script fees--just not as useful. I realise there are other factors to consider in fee-setting, but adding modules should raise the priority of fixing those fees considerably.

Reviewer 8: IMHO this CIP should not be concerned about the fees, since that is an orthogonal issue to the technical implementation of the plutus modules.

Please, anyone who is frustrated with current fee calculation and or limits for reference scripts, I encourage you to create a separate CIP that analyzes the cost and performance of deserialization of plutus scripts with a proposal of an adjusted or a completely different model for the fee calculation while providing a sufficient protection against the DDoS attack associated with reference scripts.

Reviewer 4: I agree that this should be discussed in a separate CIP, but it's not an orthogonal issue at all. Different choices for the fee structure have an influence on whether certain variants of this proposal will be economical. So having the ability to discuss the interplay of those two at the same time may lead to a better outcome overall.

As a rough estimate, if we assume a legitimate use case with 10 max-size (16kb) modules the multiplier already goes up to `1.2^6 = 2.98`. That might make some severe optimizations necessary for this use case to be economical and it's easy to imagine it just never becoming economical.

Reviewer 4: (I'd be willing to help or provide input to anyone who wants to tackle this issue, but I'm pretty busy working on Leios so I can't really justify taking the lead on this)

'proxy pattern'--a 'proxy' contract which delegates calls to the
current implementation contract, whose identity is stored in the proxy
contract's mutable state. Proxy contracts can provide a 'code upgrade'
method which modifies the mutable state to store a new implementation
contract.

The Cardano chain does not offer mutable state. Instead, a changing
state is represented by a succession of UTxOs, each holding the
current state, usually with the currently-valid UTxO identified by
holding a particular NFT. In the absence of mutable state a dependency
cannot be updated just by changing a pointer, but scripts can still be
upgraded by creating new values on the chain. The exact mechanism
depends on the kind of script--and, often, on the original script
developer preparing the ground for a later code change.

Note that, on Ethereum, a proxy contract can be updated without
changing its contract address---thanks to mutable state. On Cardano, a
script address *is* the hash of its code; of course, changing the code
will change the script address. It is very hard to see how that could
possibly be changed without a fundamental redesign of Cardano. So the

> methods discussed below are different in nature from the Ethereum one:

Author: Thanks--so I think you're saying two things:

1. Upgrade-in-place can be done more simply than suggested here, by using proxy scripts that delegate verification to a script hash kept in a state UTxO,

2. Upgrade is a minefield, and should be avoided altogether.

Where (1) is concerned, simple is good! I wonder though if it doesn't require you to buy in to the "one verifier to rule them all" approach, where one staking validator checks all the spending and minting in the transaction. I realise that's a popular approach, but not the only possible approach.

Where (2) is concerned, I have a lot of sympathy with that view, but at the same time I don't expect all libraries to be bug-free when they are first released, so it's a natural question to ask "what should I do if a library I am depending on receives a bug fix update?" It seems a little unrealistic just to ignore the problem altogether. Of course, "get it right first time" is good advice, but hard to follow consistently.

Maybe you're saying essentially: upgrading to new versions is a problem that already exists, and existing 'solutions' are equally applicable once modules are introduced--so this CIP need not address the problem specifically. Even if, by supporting larger code drawn from multiple sources, it's likely to make the problem worse.

> methods discussed below are different in nature from the Ethereum one:

Reviewer 5: > Maybe you're saying essentially: upgrading to new versions is a problem that already exists, and existing 'solutions' are equally applicable once modules are introduced--so this CIP need not address the problem specifically. Even if, by supporting larger code drawn from multiple sources, it's likely to make the problem worse.

Yes. I think smart contract upgrades is an incredibly complex problem and must be handled with extreme care. I think that this CIP should not even cover it, because the suggestions here can lead people to underestimate the severity of the problem and the care with which they must handle it. 

> what should I do if a library I am depending on receives a bug fix update?

Say that you upgrade to the new "bug fix version" what if it introduces a hidden backdoor or introduces other vulnerabilities? Importantly, the users who signed transactions and agreed to put their funds into your dApp, agreed for their funds to be secured by scripts to which they sent their funds, they did not consent for their funds to be secured by the new "bug fix script" which could introduce a backdoor to steal all their funds. Any introduction of non-manual upgradability leads to the possibility of a backdoor to drain liquidity (i.e. "upgrade" the library to a malicious contract that always succeeds if the transaction is signed by the malicious actor's pub key hash). That's why you should prefer either:

1. manual migration for upgrades - users must migrate their liquidity themselves to the new scripts.
2. Onchain Token Governance DAO based upgrades - use an onchain governance protocol, like Agora, except these protocols are very experimental on Cardano, so much so that even the creators of Agora do not use it for governance of their protocol.

> methods discussed below are different in nature from the Ethereum one:

Author: OK, thanks... I'm persuaded.

---

> CIP: "?"

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
CIP: 152
```

Reviewer 9: Resolved with https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/946/commits/19eca1768df9bacce659005c7e61c2f9a501705b.

the script runs, but for small, cheap runs we may never recover the
cost of building the unboxed tuple in the first place. On balance, I
would probably prefer *not* to do this, but this is not a strong
preference.

Finally, all the variations using tuples rely on efficient, constant
time projections of tuple components. These are not presently
available in UPLC--but they would benefit *all* UPLC users, not least
by providing an efficient implementation for Haskell record field
selectors in Haskell. Adding efficient projections for SoP data deserves
a CIP of its own; it is a prerequisite for many variations here, but
logically is not a part of implementing modules. A separate CIP should
be written for this in the near future--it should be straightforward
and uncontroversial compared to adding modules.

## Path to Active

### Acceptance criteria

- [ ] determine which approach outlined in this CIP will be selected
- [ ] `plutus` changes
- [ ] `cardano-ledger` changes
- [ ] `cardano-api` changes
- [ ] benchmarking and testing
- [ ] integrate the feature into `cardano-node`
- [ ] end-to-end testing
- [ ] release at the hard fork introducing the Dijkstra era

> ### Implementation Plan

Reviewer 9: Resolved with https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/946/commits/8986feafe1d81b8d3580f6b1a37d959570b031f6.
